<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Fit I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="fit-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Fit</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the siege and the assault were ceasèd at Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the burg had been broken, and burnt to ashes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wight that the trains of treason there laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was tried for his treachery, the truest on earth:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was Éneas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> the Athel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> and his high kindred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who kingdoms then conquered, and princes became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the wealth, well-nigh, in the West Isles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sóon as the róyal Rómulus to Rome made his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That burg with great pomp then builded he first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And named it his own name, as now it is called:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ticius<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> in Tuscany townships founded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Langobard in Lombardy lifted up homes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far o’er the French flood Felix Brutus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On many a bank full broad, Britain he set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">well fain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">War and woe and wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On that fair land have lain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And oft both bliss and blunder,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Time and time again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now when Britain had been built by Brutus the prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bold men there bred, that lov’d battle and strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at times a many wrought teen and trouble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More wonders, I wis, on this wold have befallen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than on any other I wot of, since those ancient days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of all that here built, that of Britain were kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Áy was Árthur the noblest, as I have heard tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so an adventure I essay to show you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which many men reckon a main marvel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All wonders o’ertopping that of the Table are told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye’ll listen to my lay but a little while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall tell ’t you this tide, as in town I heard it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Well is it writ for you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In story brave and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Linkèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> with letters true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In land has so been long</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The King lay at Camelot at Christmastide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a lovesome lord, leal men of the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the royal brethren of the Round Table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid revel full rich and reckless mirths.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There true knights tourney’d, by times, full many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jousted right jollily these gentle peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came to the court their carols<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> to dance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the feast went on full fifteen days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the meat and mirth that men could avise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such gladsome glee glorious to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merry din by day, and dancing o’ nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all was happiness in hall and in chamber</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among lords and ladies: ’twas the liege king’s pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the weal of the world they wonèd together⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knights noblest known under Christ himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the loveliest ladies that life ever had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he the comeliest King, that the court ruled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these fair folk all, in the flower of their age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">so free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On earth the happiest ay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And the proudest Prince was he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ye might not find today</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">So brave a company.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The year was yet young, ’twas the day of New Year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And double (as is due) on the dais was served;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the King with his knights had come into hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the chauntry in the chapel was chanted to an end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud cry was uprais’d by common and clerk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who kept Noel anew and named it full oft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then hied in the courtiers handsel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> to offer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaily cried Yule-gifts and gave them by hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All busily debating about the event⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ladies laugh’d loud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> although they had lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the winners were not wroth, well may ye trow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So made they their mirth till meal-time was come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they had wash’d, then went they to table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were rangèd by rank, as the rule is in hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queen Guenore full gay was graith’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> in the midst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the royal dais, royally array’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sendal at the sides, and a ceiling above her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tapestries full rich of the red Tars<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embroider’d and beaten with the bravest gems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might be provèd priceless, with pennies to buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">for ay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Loveliest she look’d of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">With glancing eyes and gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The dearest dame in hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Might each man soothly say.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Arthur would not eat till all had been served,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was somewhat childgear’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> and gay of his youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life sat on him light, and the less he lovèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either too long to lie or too long to sit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So busied him young blood, and his eager brain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And another mood moved him: for much did he love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All noble renown, and ne’er would he eat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At such a dear season till someone had told him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some story of chivalry, stirring and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some main marvel, that he might believe in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of high knightérrantry, or other adventure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or till someone besought him of a sickar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To join him in jousting and jeopardy of arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stake life for life, and each allow other</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fortune should favour advantage to have.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So custom’d the King, where court he e’er held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On each festive feast-day,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> with his free meiny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in Hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Therefore so proud of cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Stalwart he stands in stall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gaily at that New Year</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Much mirth he makes with all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus in stall did he stand, the stalwart Arthur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lightly of trifles he talk’d at the table.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside Queen Guenore Sir Gawain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> was graith’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Agravain Hard-hand at her other side sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were nephews to the King, and knights full noble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bishop Baldwin was above, at the end of the board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Urien’s son, Ewain, ate with his Grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These were dight on the dais and daintily served,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a sickar man sat at the sideboards.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then came in the course with a crack of the trumpets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many banners full bright a-hanging thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kettledrums next and the noble pipes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild notes and shrill with their warbles awaken’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that every heart leapt high at their touches.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came dainties therewith and dishes full pleasant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh meats in plenty, on platters so many</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ’twas pain to find place, the people before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set all the silver with sews<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> thereupon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">on cloth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A man might serve himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">As list him, nothing loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Each two had dishes twelve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Good beer and bright wine both</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now shall I of their service say you no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well may ye weet, no wánt was among them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another note full new was sounded anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the folk might have leave to fall to their vittails.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the noise of that note had nó while ceas’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the first course in the court full kindly been serv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When there flúng in, on foal, a fearsome master,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stature the tallest and stoutest on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His body to the waist so broad and so burly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his loins and his limbs so long and so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half giant at first they judg’d he might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a man he was truly, the mightiest of mould</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the finest of figure that on foal might ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of back and of breast his body was big,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet his waist and his womb were worthily small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his members, each one, match’d them in measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">full clean.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">All wonder’d at his hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And eke his lordly mien;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He seem’d bold knight and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But glow’d all over green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All wondrous in green was this wight, and his weeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A close-fitting coat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> that clung on his body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A merry mantle over it, meetly adorn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fair-trimmed fur, a lining full fine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blythe ermine bright; and a hood with it bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught back from his locks and laid on his shoulders;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neat hose well-haul’d, of that hue all of green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That closed on his calf, and clean spurs under</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bright gold, on silk bands, barrèd full richly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pointed shoes under shanks, that shone in the stirrup</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All his vésture vérily was of verdant sheen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both the bars of his belt, and the bright jewels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were richly arranged o’er the radiant array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silken stuffs, on himself and his saddle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were tedious to tell of the trifles one half</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were broider’d thereon, of the birds and the flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in gay hues of green, with gold in the midst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pendants of his poitrel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> and the proud crupper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The molains,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> the metal, aumáil’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> were of green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stirrups that he stood in stain’d of the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The saddlebows in suit, and the splendid pommels⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All glimmer’d and gleam’d with the green jewels;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the foal that he fared on, of fine green too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">certain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A green horse great and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A stiff steed to restrain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">With broider’d bridle-thong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He match’d the man, ’tis plain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All gaily in green this gallant was gear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the hair of his head with his horse was in suit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair waving locks that enfolded his shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great beard like a bush o’er his breast falling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with the athel hair that hung from his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was bobb’d all about, the elbows above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the half of his arms it halchèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> thereunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a King’s capados<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> that clings on him close.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mane of his horse full meetly it match’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well crispèd and comb’d, with knots very many</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Folden with fildor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> the fair green amongst⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A harl of the hair with a harl of the gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tail and his topping were twinèd in suit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bounden were both with a bright green band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dubb’d with rich stones to the dock’s end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his head was a wharl-knot wound with a ribbon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many bells full bright of brent gold rung.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a foal upon field, such a rider on foal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No eye in that hall had beheld ere that hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Pardie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He look’d as levin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Said all that did him see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Them thought that no man might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Endure his dints to dree.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet had he no helmet nor hawberk either,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No pisan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> nor plate, not a piece of armour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shield nor no shaft to shove with or strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he held in one hand a cluster of holly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is greatest in green when groves are bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an axe in the other, huge beyond measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A terrible tool to tell of in speech:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The head of this axe had an ellyard’s length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> of green steel with gold was enchasèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bit burnisht bright, with a broad edge on it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well shapen to sheer as a sharp razor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stale to this steel was a timber full stout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with iron was wound to the wánd’s ènd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And engravèd in green with gracious devices:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lace round it lapp’d that lock’d at the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was halchèd full often the handle about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a choice tassel attachèd thereto</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On buttons of bright green broider’d full rich.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This áthel híes him ín and the hall enters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driving to the dais: no danger he fear’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave none greeting but gazed ay before him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no word did he utter, but “where is” (quoth he)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The governor of this gyng?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> full glad should I be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that same to have sight, and with him would speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">reasón.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On knights he cast his e’en</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And swagger’d up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then stopp’d, and studied keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Who there had most renown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was long looking that liege to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not a man but marvel’d what it might mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That an athel and a horse should have such a colour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to grow green as grass, and greener it seem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glowing more green than enamel on gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They studied what stood there, then stalk’d it a-nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With áll the wónder in the wórld what work it would do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For many a marvel had they seen but no marvel like this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore phantom and fäerie the folk must it deem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many an athel was for answer o’erawed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All were stounded at his speech and stood there like stocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a swooning silence; as on sleep they were fall’n,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that court so stately were still as a stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">well-nigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Not all, in faith! for fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But some for courtesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On the Prince that had no peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They waited for reply.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By the dais he marks this marvel of a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courteously accosts him, that coward was never:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye are welcome, good wight, I wis, to this place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am head of this hostel, Arthur my name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May it list you alight, and lodge here, I pray you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whatso your will is, we shall weet after.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, so help me,” said he, “the high God in heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wone any while, it was not mine errand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis because thy fame, Sir, is flaunted so high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy burg and thy barons the best are holden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stoutest under steel-gear on steed to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worthiest and wightest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> of the world’s children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proved men to play with in all pure games,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here courtesy is custom (I know it by tale),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have wended me hither, I wis, at this tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full sure may ye be by this branch that I bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I pass as in peace, and no peril I seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with force had I fared in fighting array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a hauberk at home and a helmet too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shield and a sharp spear, shining all bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other weapons to wield, full well do I know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But war I would not, and my weeds are the softer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If so hardy thou be as by all thou art holden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt grant of thy grace the game that I ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by right.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Arthur made answer clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Said he, “Sir courteous knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">If thou crave combat here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Thou failest not to fight.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, in faith,” said the fell man, “no fight do I challenge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boys on this bench are but beardless children.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I haspèd in arms on a hígh stèed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man here could match me, their might is too feeble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I crave in this court but a Christmas game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis Yule and New Year, and youth ye have here:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any in this house so hardy him hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be so bold in his blood, and of brain so wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As stiffly to strike one stroke for another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give him for gift this gísarm<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This axe so heavy, to handle as he likes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I bide the first blow, as bare as I sit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any be so true as to test what I tell ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him leap to me lightly, I lend him this weapon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He may keep it his own, I quit-claim it for ever)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand him a stroke full stoutly on floor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I bargain for naught but a blow in return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">barlay:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet give I him respite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A twelvemonth and a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Now haste! Will any wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Herein dare ought to say?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If at first they were stounded, e’en stiller were then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the athels in hall, both the high and the low.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rider on his rouncy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> wroth him in saddle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rudely his red eyes rolling about him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pucker’d his bristled brows, that blinkèd so green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waving his beard watch’d who would rise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When none him accosted he cough’d very loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d him with an air, and straightway gan speak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What! is this Arthur’s house?” quoth the athel at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That the rumour runs of through realms so many?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are your pomp and your pride, and the prowess ye vaunt of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your warplay so grim, and your great talking?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is the revel and renown of the Round Table</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a word o’erwalted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> of one wight’s speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all dote ye for dread ere a dint be offered.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that he laugh’d so loud that the liege King griev’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for shame the blood shot to his face so sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">of cheer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He wax’d as wroth as wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">So did all that were there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The King so bold by kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then stood that stalwart near,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And said, “Athel, by heaven, thy asking is foolish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as folly thou hast sought, befalls thee to find it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know none that is abasht at thy boasting so big;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me now thy gisarm, in God’s name, I pray thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For gladly I grant thee the grace thou hast ask’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leapt to him lightly, and lent him his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiercely the fell man alighted on foot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Arthur has his axe, and the haulm he grips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sternly makes play, of his stroke thinking.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stalwart before him stands like a tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Higher than ány in that hóuse by a head and far more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stern cheer he stands, and his beard he strokes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with countenance dree<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> he draws down his coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more daunted or dismay’d for the dread buffet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than if boy upon bench had brought him to drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">of wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain from seat did rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And to the King incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“I beseech you, Sir, (he cries)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">This mellay might be mine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Would ye now! worthy lord,” said that wight to the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Bid me stir from this stall and stand by you there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so without villainy I void from this table?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If my liege lady liked it not ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before this high court I would come to your counsel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For methinks it not seemly (’tis sooth that I say)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the King’s own person to combat be call’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though yourself be desirous to take up the suit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While so bold men on bench about you are sitting⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no wights in the world of will are so keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or have better bodies on bent, where battle is rear’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am weakest, I wot, and the feeblest of wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And least loss were my life, would ye learn but the truth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my uncle ye are, is all I can plead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no bounty but your blood in my body I know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This antick adventure behoves not your Highness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me let it fall, since first I besought it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I counsel not comely, the Court shall decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">nor blame.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The courtiers, whispering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Debate the double claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Relieve the crownèd King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And give Gawain the game.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then commanded the King that the Knight should arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he drew from his seat, and came down from the dais,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel’d to the King, and claspèd the weapon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the liege lord releas’d it, and lifting his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s blessing him gave and gladly him bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both his heart and his hand right hardy to keep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mind, cousin!” quoth the King, “one cut that thou give him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou fight with him fair, unafearèd, I trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt thou dree any dint he may deal thee after.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then grips he the gisarm and goes to his man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who boldly him bides and no whit is abash’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But speaks to Sir Gawain, that gallant in green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Recite we our forewards<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> ere further we fare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I conjure thee, as true Knight, that truly thou tell me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is thy name: thy word I would have.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In good faith,” quoth he, “Gawain my name is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who deal thee this dint, what doom so betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at this time twelvemonth I take one of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what weapon thou wilt, and no wight with me bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">alive.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He answers him again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Sir Gawain, so may I thrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But I am wondrous fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">This dint that thou shalt drive.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Egod,” quoth the green one, “right glad am I, Sir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thy hand to receive the service I sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast rightly rehears’d, by reasons full true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the covenant clean, that I craved of the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sáve that thou assure me on thy sickar troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thyself thou wilt seek me, wheresó that thou thinkest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may be found upon fold, and fetch thee such wages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou deal’st me today this dais beside.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whither,” said the wight, “shall I wend on that errand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou wonest I wot not, by Him that me wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor know I thee, Sir Knight, by court or by name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now teach me thereto, and tell me the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And áll my wít I shall wáre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> to win to thy place⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swear it for sooth, as a sickar knight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis enough at New Year (what needs any more?)”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the gallant in green to the knightly Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If I tell thee of that, when the tap I have ta’en.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou hast smitten me fair, I shall smartly teach thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my house and my home and my ówn nàme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then my troth mayst thou try, and to foreward be true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no speech if I spend, thou speedest the better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou may’st lodge in thy land, nor look any further:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Let be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Grip thy grim tool amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Thy dints now let us see.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Gladly, sir,” says Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And stern his axe strokes he.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Green Knight on ground graithly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> him dresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little he louts,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> to let the skin show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His long lovely locks he lays o’er his crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the naked nape for the knock makes ready.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain gripp’d his axe and heav’d it on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(His left foot forward, firm on the floor),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then swung it adown full swift on the bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the sharp edge shore, sheer through the báckbone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cut the flesh cleanly, and clove him in two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blade of the bright steel bit in the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The head from a-high to the earth bounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that many foin’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> it with their feet, as forward it roll’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood from the body blink’d on the green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nor falter’d nor fell the fey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> man for all that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But started forth stoutly on stalwart shanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And roughly he reach’d, mid the ranks on the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his lovely head, that he lifted at once:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he turns to his colt and, catching the bridle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steps into steelbow and strides aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holding by the hair his head in his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as soberly seats him in saddle again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As no únhap had ail’d him, though headless he was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Sans head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He writhèd every way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The gruesome trunk that bled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ere he had said his say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Many of him had dread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For the head in his hand he holds up aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the dukes on the dais he dresses the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it lifts up its lids, and looks with its eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moots with its mouth as much as this speech:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“See, Gawain, thou be graith to go as thou said’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as faithfully seek, good friend, till thou find me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in hall thou didst promise, in these athels’ hearing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Green Chapel fare, I charge thee, to fetch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a dint as thou dealtest, the due that thou owest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be presently paid at New-Year by prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men know me as Knight of the Green Chapel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So to find, if thou seek, failest thou never.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore come, or coward behoves thee be call’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a roar and a rout the reins did he turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flung oút at the háll-door, his head in his hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the flint-sparks flew from his fóal’s hòoves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither he went no wight of them knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Any more than they wist from whence he was come:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">What then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The King and Gawain there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">At the green one laugh’d and gren;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet all must it declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A marvel among men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though Arthur the high King at heart had wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sign he let see, but said as beseem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the comely queen, with courteous speech:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dear dame, this day be ye daunted no whit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well becomes such craft at Christmastide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laiking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> of interlude,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> laughter and song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among courtly carols of knights and ladies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’ertheless to my meat I máy me address,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a marvel have I met, I must not gainsay it.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He glanced on Sir Gawain, and graciously said he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Sir, hang up thine axe, that has hewen enough.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then over the dais ’twas dight on a dorser,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all might behold it on high and marvel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by title thereof tell the tale of wonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they moved to their meal full meetly together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King and the knight, and keen men them served</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all dainties double, as dearest them seem’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all manner of meat, and minstrelsy too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They spent the glad day, till speeded an end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Now, Gawain, make thou sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Faint-heart that thou withstand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To seek the adventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That thou hast ta’en in hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
