<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Fit II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="fit-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="se:label">Fit</span>
				<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O happen’d this handsel to Arthur at Yule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When for vaunting vows of adventure he yearned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though brave wórds had been wanting when they went to their meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now are they bestead with stern work in plenty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To begin this game was Gawain full glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the end be heavy, have ye no wonder:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though men’s minds are merry, when mead they have ta’en,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A year swiftly yerns<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a> and yields ne’er the same⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>End and beginning agree not together.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So this Yule over-pass’d and the year after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each season full soon ensued upon other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After Christmas came the crabbèd Lenten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tries us with fish, and fare more meagre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the weather of the world with winter it chides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold shrinks adown,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> clouds rise on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shed the sheen rain in showers full warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fall upon fair field; flowers peep forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grassland and grove green is their raiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds busk them to build, and bravely they sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For solace of the summer that sues thereafter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And blossoms swell and blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On hedgerows rich and gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then noble notes enow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In holt are heard, in May.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Comes the season of summer with its soft breezes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Zephyr soughs gently o’er seedling and grass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! winsome is the wort on the wold that awakens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bíde a blíssful glánce of the bright sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the dripping dew drops from the leafage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Autumn soon hies with his harder weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warns it ere winter to wax and be ripe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then drives he with drought the dust to arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it flies on high, from the face of the fold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wroth winds of the welkin wrestle with the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaves dart from linden and light to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the grass grows gray that green was before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then all ripens and rots that rose up in springtime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus yerns the year in yesterdays many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And winter winds back, ’tis the world’s order,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">(Ah true!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Until Michelmas moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Is come, and winter’s due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then thinks Gawain full soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Of the ride that he must rue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet till All Hallows with Arthur he bode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who made feast on that festival for his friend’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid revel full rich of the Round Table.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then courteous Knights and comely ladies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All for love of that liege were in longing and sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ne’er the less nor the latter they allow’d but mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though many were joyless, jesting the while.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After supper, full sadly he sought to his uncle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spoke of his passage in speech very plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, liege lord of my life, your leave I would ask;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know all the case, and I care no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my trouble to talk, or to teen you one whit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am bound for the buffet a bare night hence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Green Knight must seek, as God will me speed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the best of the burg busk’d them together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ewain and Eric, and others full many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Dodinal the Dour, the Duke of Clarence,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Launcelot, and Lionel, and Lucan the good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Bors and Sir Bedivere, big men both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many another worthy, with Mador of the Port;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came all this company seeking the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With care at their heart, to counsel Sir Gawain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was dole very dree that day in the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so worthy as Gawain should wend on that errand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To endúre a gríevous dínt, and deal nevermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with brand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The Knight made ay good cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Said he, “Now grief is bann’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">’Gainst destiny so drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">What may man do but stand?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He dwells all that day and dresses on the morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asks early for his arms, that were all to him brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was raught on the floor a rich red carpet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much was the gilt gear that gleamèd thereon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stalwart on’t steps, and the steel handles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All dearly dubb’d in a doublet of Tars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a crafty capados, closely fitting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bounden and lined with a bright ermine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, on his soles the sabatons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> they set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lápped his légs in gréaves of lovely steelwork</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With poleyns<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> thereon pight, that were polisht full clean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were girt round his knees with golden latchets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair cuishes next, that cunningly enclosèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His great thewèd thighs, and with thongs were fasten’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the brawden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> byrnie, with its bright steel rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That encasèd his body o’er cloth full costly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last, on both his arms, a brace well burnisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With good cowters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> and gay, and the gloves of plate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And áll the góodly géar that should gainly serve him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">that tide:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His noble coat-armure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His golden spurs of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And then his brand full sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">With silk girt round his side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When he was haspèd in arms, his harness was splendid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least latchet or loop was of learning gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So arm’d as he was he hearken’d his mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemnly offer’d at the high altar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he comes to the King and his court-brethren,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes kindly his leave of lords and of ladies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who kiss and escort him, and to Christ him commend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thén was Gríngolet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> gráith and girt with a saddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gleam’d full gaily with fringes of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with nails anew for the nonce was studded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bridle with bars of bright gold was striped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The apparail of the poitrel and its proud trappings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crupper and the coverture, accorded with the arsons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich studs all over, arrangèd on red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all glitter’d and gleam’d like the glent of the sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then has he his helmet and eagerly it kisses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was stapled for strength, and stuffèd within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sat high on his head, well haspèd behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kerchief bright o’er the beaver was bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embroider’d and set with the bravest jewels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the broad silk band, and birds on the seams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Painted popinjays<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> preening themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turtles and trueloves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> entailèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> so thick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mány a búrd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> had been búsy seven winters about them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">I ween, of greater price</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Was the circlet round his crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Of diamonds a device</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That were both bright and brown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then they show’d him the shield⁠—’twas of shéer gùles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the pentacle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> painted in pure gold on it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the baldric he caught it and cast o’er his neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it became well the Knight, that comely armour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now why it should ’long to the leal Gawain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am intent to tell you, though my tale may linger;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a sign that Solomon sometime appointed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be a tried token of truest fealty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis a figure wherein there are five angles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lines overlap and lock in each other</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without end, every way: and Englishmen call it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Everywhere, as I hear, the Endless Knot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this cause it became the good Kníght to wear it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in five ways faithful and five times five</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Gawain known for good, and as gold refinèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Void of all villainy, with virtues endued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in moat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">So this pentangle new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He bore on shield and coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">As wight of word most true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And gentlest knight of note.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>First he was found faultless in his fíve wìts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor failèd he ever in his five fingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his affiance on field was in the fíve woùnds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Christ got on Cross, as the creed tells us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whereso this man was in mellay bestead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thought was on this, above all things else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his courage he caught from the five joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the high Queen of heaven had in her Child.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which cause the good Knight becomingly bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the úpper hálf of his shíeld Her image depainted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when he glanced on that Fair his force never falter’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fifth five, as I find, that this free usèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were fraunchise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> and fellowship before all else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleanness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> and courtesy, known in him ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pity, that passes all⁠—these pure five</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were more happ’d on this athel than on all other knights.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these thews,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> all five, were so throng upon him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ran each into other, nor any end had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On five points fixt that failèd never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along ev’ry line neither link’d nor sunder’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But everywhere endless, at each angle alike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the game e’er began, or glode to an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore on his sheen shield was shapen this knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Royally, with red gold upon réd gùles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the pure pentangle by people is call’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">of lore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Now graith’d is Gawain gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His trusty lance he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He gave them all Good-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He deem’d for evermore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He put spurs to his steed and sprang on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fast that the flint-sparks flew out behind him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that saw that sire sigh’d in their hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said to each other (it seemèd but sooth)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grieving for Gawain, “By God, ’tis a pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We should lose such a liege, in his life so noble!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find his fellow on fold, in faith, is not easy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More warily to have wrought had been wiser, in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to have dubb’d him, dear man, a duke to become,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shining light in the land, a leader of men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So ’twere better he had been than broken to naught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheaded by an elfin, for idle pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knew ever King such counsel to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As at Christmas games to catch men in quibbles?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many were the warm tears that wellèd from eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that seemly sire sought from those wones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">that day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He made there no abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But swiftly went his way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A wildsome track he rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The book as I heard say.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now rides he and roams through the realm of Logrès,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Gawain, at God’s best, no game though he thought it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft friendless, alone, he had lodging by nights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he found not before him the fare that he liked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had no fellow but his foal by frith and forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no gossip but God to talk with by gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he drew full nigh into the North Wales.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the isles of Anglesey held he to left-ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fared o’er the fords by the jutting forelands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over at the Holy Head,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> till eft he made shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the wilderness of Wirral; won’d there but few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That either God or man with a good heart lovèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever as he fared, of folks that befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ask’d if they had heard of any Green Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In any ground thereabout, at the Green Chapel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all nick’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> him with nay, said that never in their life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had they seen any soul that such a hue had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">as green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He wander’d ways full strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">By dreary hill and dene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His cheer full oft might change</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Or e’er that chapel was seen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Many a cliff he o’erclomb in countries unknown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far stray’d from his friends, a stranger he rode;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At each water or warth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> where the wight ever pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay found he before him a foe uncanny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that so foul and so fell, that to fight behoved him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And marvels so many by mountains he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were tedious to tell the tenth-deal thereof.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with worms<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> did he war, and with wolves also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with the satyrs that sought from the screes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wild bulls and bears and with boars otherwhiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with ogres that snorted from the hígh fèlls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he not doughtily dree’d, and dearly God loved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtless full often to death he had been done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if the warfare griev’d him, worse was the winter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the clouds shed adown the clear cold water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That froze ere it fall might, to the fallow earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near slain by the sleet, he slept in his irons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More nights than enow in naked rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where clattering fro’ the crest the cold burn ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hung high o’er his head in icicles sharp.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in peril and pain and plights very hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross country he clomb till Christmas-even,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The knight full sore that tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To Mary made his moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That she should well him guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And win him to some wone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By a mount that morning merrily rode he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a forest full deep that was fearful wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High hills on each hand and holtwoods thereunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hoar oaks full huge, a hundred together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hazel and the hawthorn were all in a tangle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rough moss and rank beraggèd all over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mány a bírd unblíthe on the bare twigs sitting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piteously piped for pain of the cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gallant on Gringolet glides them beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through mizzy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> and mire, a man full lonesome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’twas much on his mind lest his mass he should miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor see the service of that Sire, who that self-same night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a burd was born to abye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> our trouble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so sighing he said “I beseech thee, Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mary, that art mildest mother so dear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some harbour where humbly the mass I may hearken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy matins tomorrow meekly I ask you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I presently pray my pater and avè</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">and creed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He pray’d and still rode on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He cried for his misdeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then sain’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> himself anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And said “Christ’s cross me speed.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had not sain’d himself, good soul, but thrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he was ware in that wood of a wone in a moat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above a laund,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> on a low, that leam’d under branches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mány a búrly bóle at the brink of the ditches;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A castle the comeliest that knight ever own’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Built on a bentfield, and about it a park</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fencèd compactly with paling of pikes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for more than two miles, trees many encompass’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Gawain a while regarded that keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it shimmer’d and shone through the sheen branches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he has off his helmet and thanks from his heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jesus and Saint Julian, those gentle watchers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who courtesy had shown him and his cry hearken’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Good lodging,” cried Gawain, “grant, I beseech you!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with gilded heels he goads on Gringolet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by right good chance the road he has chosen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That brings him anon to the brídge-ènd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The bridge was up, on height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The gates were lockèd fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The walls were stoutly pight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">It might fear no wind’s blast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then the athel hoves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> and halts on the bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the double ditch that engirdled that dwelling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wonderly deep stood the wall in water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a huge height also it heav’d up aloft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hard hewn stone úp to the cornice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emban’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> under battlement in the bést wìse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Garrets<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> full gay were gear’d thereover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a lovely casement that closèd full clean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A better barbican that bearn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> never saw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Further in, full high the hall he beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With turrets atop all cuspèd and tined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crown’d with capitals craftily taper’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carven finials curiously chisel’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were chalk-white chimneys, the choicest of art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blink’d all bright on the bastel roof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And painted pinnacles upon it were sprinkled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the crenellations cluster’d so thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They seem’d pared out of paper, a palace of fäerie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that free on the foal ’twas a fáir sìght;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coúld he but compass, that cloister within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hostel to harbour, while holiday lasted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in hall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He call’d, and soon appear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A porter at his call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Kindly his errand heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And hail’d him, from the wall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Good sir,” quoth Gawain, “would’st go mine errand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the lord of this land, and a lodging crave me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Aye! by Peter!” said the porter. “And I promise you sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye’ll be welcome, good wight, to wone while ye like!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hied on his errand and hasten’d again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With servants assembled the Knight to receive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did down the drawbridge, and drew out to meet him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for courtesy kneel’d to the cóld eàrth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To welcome that wight as worthy them thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gates they set wide to give him a passage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he bade them arise, and the bridge rode over.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some seiz’d him in saddle, to set him on foot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stout men busk’d them to stable his steed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knights with their squires escorted him then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring him full blithe with bliss into hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had off his helmet, there hied men enow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To receive it and serve him as seem’d to him good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brand and his blazon, both did they take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the athel with courtesy hail’d them, each one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And proud men there press’d that prince for to honour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All haspèd in armour they brought him to hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where a fire full fair on the floor burn’d bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the master of the meiny moved from his chamber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His guest to receive and graciously greet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye are welcome,” quoth he, “to wone as ye will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is here is your own, to have at your pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">a space.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Gramercy,” said Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Christ yield you of his grace.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">As knights that seemèd fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Each other they embrace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gawain glanced at the goodman, that greeted him so fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought it a bold knight that the búrg òwn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A huge athel he, in the prime of his eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His beard broad and bright, and all beaver-hued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grim, strong in his stance on stalwart shanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell face as the fire, and free of his speech;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he seemèd in sooth (só Gawain thought)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit man for a lordship o’er loyal lieges.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stepped to a chamber and straightway bade choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goodly esquire, to escort him and serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there hied at his best henchmen enow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That brought him to a bower, with bedding full noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay silk hangings with golden hems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coverlets full comely of curious patchwork,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broider’d and edg’d with the bright ermine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curtains running on ropes, red gold rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich tapestries of Tars tent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> on the walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carpets as fair under foot on the floor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here was he despoil’d with speeches of mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his bráwden byrnie of máil and his bright armour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then robes full rich his servants him raught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a change of clothing, to choose as he pleas’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as he had drawn one and dress’d it upon him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fair-fitting robe with flowing skirts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a picture of spring he seemèd in semblance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the robe around him so richly broider’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his gear thereunder so glowing and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a comelier Knight Chríst never made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">they thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Came he from far or near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Well seemèd that he ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To be prince without peer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In field where brave men fought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A chair by the chimney, where charcoal burn’d bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was array’d all ready to rest the good Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cushions full costly on coverings of quilt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a merry mantle on the man was cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bléaunt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> of brown, richly embroider’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lined full fair with furs of the finest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all edg’d with ermine; and the hood with the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sat in that settle in his splendid array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And warm’d himself well; then the wight’s cheer mended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon was set up on trestles a table well tight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a clean cloth on it that clear white shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sanap<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> and a saler,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> and silveren spoons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he wash’d at his will and went to his meat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supper forthwith they seemlily served⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sews of the daintiest, season’d with skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Double fare as is fitting) and fishes full many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some baken in bread, some grill’d on the gledes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or seeth’d, or in stew well savour’d with spice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ay sauces they served as that sire might like.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A feast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> he call’d it full freely and oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his courtly way, when the courtiers cheer’d him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">as friend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“This penance now, Sir, take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And soon it shall amend.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Much mirth did Gawain make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For wine to his head did wend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then tried him his host, and touch’d on his travel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by questions discreet enquired of his quest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he courteously granted he came from the court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Arthur the athel the sovranty held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruler most royal of the Round Table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that ’twas Gawain himself who among them sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to that Christmas, as the case had befall’n.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that lord when he learn’d that the leal man he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud laugh’d he thereat, he liked it so well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all in that household were overjoy’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tide to appear in the prince’s presence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all prowess and price,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> and all pure knighthood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his person belong’d, and were prais’d in him ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before all men on earth his honour was highest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then softly would each man say to his fellow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now skill shall we see of seemly manners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the terms full clean of courteous converse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is speed in speech shall we learn unspeer’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since among us we find this fine father of nurture.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God has giv’n us his grace in goodliest measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a guest as Gawain to grant at this tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When blithe men on bench of His birth shall sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">and sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To know of knightly cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">This beam now shall us bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Methinks all that him hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Shall learn of love-talking.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the dinner was done, and the dais risen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was near to the night that the time drew nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaplains to the chapel chose them the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rung a festal peal at that festal season,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the high evensong of the holy tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the lord his lady led to the service,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Into a comely closet queenly she enter’d,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gawain full gay graithly them follow’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the lap the lord took him, and led him to seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accosted him couthly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> and call’d him by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said he was the welcomest wight in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his heart he thank’d him, and they halchèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full soberly sat while the service lasted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then list that lady to look on the knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she came from her closet with dames of the court;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was the fairest of feature, and freshest of teint,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the finest of figure of all women on fold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More lovely than Gwenore she looks to Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he goes through the chancel his greeting to give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anóther lády her léd by the left hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who of age was the older, an ancient it seem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escorted by squires with a courtly respect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unlike to look on those ladies appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair of youth was the younger, but yellow the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In complexion of rose was the younger array’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough cheeks and wrinkled hung on the ancient;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kerchiefs on the one, with clear-white pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Her breast and her bright throat all bare display’d,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the sheen snow shone, that is shed upon hills;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The elder had a gorget<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> gear’d o’er her throat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chin full swart, in a chalk-white chimble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fórehead fólden in sílk, her front all muffled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turreted and trick’d with trifles and gauds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that nothing was bare but the bláck bròws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nose and the eyes and the naked lips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were unsightly with sores and sorrily blear’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worshipful wight you might wéll call her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">fore God!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Her body was short and stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Her buttocks round and broad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A tastier thing, no doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Was she that by her strode.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gawain glanced on that gay with the gracious mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by leave of the lord, the ladies he greeted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient he salutes, louting full low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovely one he laps a little in his arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comelily kisses, and knightly bespeaks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They crave his acquaintance, and quickly he asks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sooth servant to be, if só it them please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they took him between them, and, talking the while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Led to chamber and chimney,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> where spices full choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They call’d for, that brisk men bustled to bring them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the winsome wine therewíth each time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lord so lovesome leapt up full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By occasions many he made for them mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hád off his hood, and hung it on spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any to hold the honour thereof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who that Christmas⁠—while most weal should waken:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And I shall try, by my troth, to contend with the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere any shall help me that hood to forfeit.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus with laughter and jest it lists him to laik,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to gladden Sir Gawain with games in hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">that night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">’Tis time to end their play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lord bids bring the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain “God-speed” did say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And to his bed him dight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On the morrow, as men remember the tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When God for our destiny to die was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ev’ry wone in the world waxes weal for His sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the folk at the court had their festive fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both at mess and at meal-time men full doughty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daintiest dishes dress’d on the dais.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ancient of eld at the end of the board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the lord at her side, full seemlily sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain and the gay burd, together they ate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Highest in honour, e’en as was meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rest by rank, as the rule orders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were seated on settle and served at table.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was meat, there was mirth, there was measureless joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereof for to tell were trouble o’ermuch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I pain’d me perchance to point you the tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I guess that Gawain and the gay lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their company caught such comfort together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the dear dalliance of whisperèd words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In careless converse, courteous and chaste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That their play surpass’d any prince’s game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">I trow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Some the loud trumpet wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Some on the shrill pipe blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Each man his note did mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And they two theirs also.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Much merriment made they that day and the morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the third day as throng thereupon follow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The jollity of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> John’s day was joyous to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas the last of the laik, those lieges well knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There were guests to go on the gray morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with wassail and wine they wake all that night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dance uncaring the courtly carols;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the last, full late their leave they have ta’en,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each wight that must wend on his way towards home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain gives good-day to the goodman anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he leads him to chamber, and the chimney beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draws him adree<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a> and dearly him thanks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the winsome worship that the wight had deign’d him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By honouring his house at the holy tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And adorning that place with his princely presence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And so long as I live, I shall be the better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Gawain was my guest at God’s own feast.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gramercy, Sir,” said Gawain, “the gift is from you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the honour is my own, the High King reward you!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore I plight me your pleasure to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I am beholden, in high and in low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by right.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lord said he were fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Longer to keep the Knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then answer’d him Gawain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">By no way that he might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then by courtesy craved he to know of Sir Gawain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What dréad deed had driv’n him at that déar tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the King and the court so keenly to seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the holidays wholly were hied out of town.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Forsooth, sir,” he said, “ye say but the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A high errand and a hasty has sped me from home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am summon’d, in sooth, to seek to a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I wot not whither I must wend to find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I might not miss it on New-Year’s morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the land in Logrès, so our Lord help me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore this point, sir, I put to you presently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye tell me with truth if ye tale ever heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Green Chapel, where on ground it stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the Knight its keeper, that of colour is green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was stablisht a tryst by statute between us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I meet him at that mark, if I míght be alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Néw-Year he named wants nów but a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I would look on that liege, if God would allow me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More gladly, by God’s son, than all góod upon earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, by your will, my way I must wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have now but a bare three days to busy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as fain to fall fey as fail of mine errand.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the lord with a laugh, “Now lodge here behoves you⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall take you to your tryst by the term of the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gréen Chapel on ground, let it grieve you no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall bide in your bed and be at your ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the first of the year ye shall fare on your way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To your mark at midmorn, to make what you like</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">beside.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Dwell here till New-Year’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Rise and depart that tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ye shall be set on way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A bare two mile to ride.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then was Gawain full glad and gaily he laugh’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I thank you for this, before all other things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since my goal I have gain’d, I agree at your will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dwell here, and do what else ye may deem.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then drew him that sire to a seat at his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let fetch the ladies to like them the better.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much jollity they enjoy’d, those gentles twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lord for his love spoke the leal man so fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he wist not of his words, like a wight unwitted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then cried he aloud, as he call’d to the Knight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye have deem’d ye will do the deed that I bid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will ye promise keep at this present time?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By my troth, sir, yes,” said the trusty Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“While I bide in your burg, I obey all your bidding.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Since ye have travell’d,” quoth he, “and toil’d from afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have wakèd me wíth, your wants are uncared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of sleep and of sustenance; soothly I know it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall lodge in your loft and lie at your ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tomorrow till mass, and to meat ye shall wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When ye will, with my wife, who with you shall sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with company comfort, till to court I return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Rest so;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And I shall early rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A-hunting will I go.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Sir Gawain grants him this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And louts to him full low.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet further,” quoth he, “a foreward we’ll make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I win in the woodland to you shall I waive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what here ye achieve, ye shall change it therefor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bargain, I beg ye! We’ll abide by it fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether worthless our wins or aught worth shall befall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In God’s name,” said Gawain, “I grant it you fain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laik that ye list, it likes me full well.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who brings us the beverage this bargain to seal?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said the lord of the land; they laugh’d everyone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They drank and made dalliance, both dainty and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lords and ladies, so long as they pleas’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with Frankish<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> fare and with fashion of court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stay’d they and stood, and stilly they whisper’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comelily kiss’d, and cravèd their leave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By lieges full lief, and with learning torches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These bearns to their beds are brought at the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">well fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But to bed ere they repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Covenants record again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That old lord debonair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His laik could well maintain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
