<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Fit III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="fit-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Fit</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Full early before day the folks were afoot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guests that would go, their grooms they summon’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hied them in haste the horses to saddle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather’d the gear and girded the mails;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those of rank were ready to ride all array’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leapt up lightly, and lay to their bridles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each wight on his way, where it well liked them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dear lord of the land was not last either,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Array’d for the riding, with retinue gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A morsel he ate, when his mass he had heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with bugle to bentfield he busk’d him anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as any daylight dawn’d upon earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He and his athels on horse were mounted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lads of that craft coupled their hounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unclosèd the kennels and call’d them thereout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blew bigly on bugles thrée báre móots,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the bratches<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> bayed⁠—and a brave noise made they;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hounds that went chasing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> they chastied with whips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred of hunters, as I have heard tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">of the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Beaters to station hied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Huntsmen their hounds<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> releas’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And horns made, far and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Great noise in that forèst.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At first cry of the quest quakèd the deer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doting for dread went away up the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hied to the heights, but angerly there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were stay’d at the stations, that stoutly ascried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The high-headed harts they let háve a passage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the brave bucks too, with the broad antlers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in fermison<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> months the master had bidden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man should meddle with the mále dèer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the hinds they held in, with a Hey! and a Ware!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with din drove the does, down to the valleys.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sharp was the shooting of wingèd shafts!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At each woodland glade whistled an arrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on brown hide bit, with its broád bàrb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How they bray’d and bled, on bank as they died!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And running on a race, hounds rush’d in pursuit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hunters with horns hasten’d them after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a cracking cry as if cliffs had bursten!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And any that scaped the shafts of the shooters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a stour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a> were stay’d and torn at the stations,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the time they had been turn’d and teas’d to the waters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wary were the wights that watch’d in the vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the greyhounds so great, that gripp’d them anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell’d them to ground, fast as e’er look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">ye might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lord, like happy boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Rode and did oft alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He drove that day with joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A-hunting till the night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So this lord is laiking by linden-wood eaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good man, Gawain, in gay bed sleeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies snug till any gleam glimmers on wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under coverlet clean, curtain’d about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on slumber he slid, a sly noise heard he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little din at his door, which daintily open’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heav’d up his head out of the clothes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A corner of the curtain he caught up a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watched full warily what it might be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas the lady herself, lovely to look on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who drew the door after, so stealthy and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boun’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> toward the bed; and he blush’d and shamed him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slipt him down slyly, and look’d as if sleeping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stepped she stilly, and stole to the bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast up the curtain, and creeping within it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat her full softly on the béd-sìde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And waited a while to watch when he waken’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time did Gawain lie there lurking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast in his conscience what such a case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might mean or amount to: marvel him thought it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he said to himself more seemly it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By speech or by spell to aspy her intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he waken’d, and wroth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> him, and toward her turn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opening his eye-lids with an air of surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his safety him sain’d, and in secret a prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">he said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Winsome of chin and cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">With blent hues white and red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full kindly did she speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And with dainty lips laughèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Good morrow. Sir Gawain,” said the gay lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye are a sleeper unsly to be so outwitted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This time are ye ta’en! Fail a truce between us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall bind yoii in your bed, be ye well sure.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With laughter the lady launcèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a> her jest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Good morrow, my gay,” said Gawain full blithe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye may work on me your will, it likes me full well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I surrender me readily, and cry you for ruth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meseems ’tis best só, when so me behoves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thus he jested in turn and jollily laugh’d).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But please, lovely lady, your leave I would ask,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your prisoner release, and pray him to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would boun from my bed and busk me the better⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more ease should I have, to hold with you converse.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay for sooth, fair sir,” said that sweet in reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye shall not boun from your bed, I offer you better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall hap<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> you here on the other side too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have converse with my captive, now I have caught him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I ween full well, ye’re the wight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> Sir Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the world all worships, whéreso ye ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your kindness, your courtesy, are knightliest held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among lords and ladies, and all that life have.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I wis ye are with me, and we are alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lord and his lieges a long way are ridden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other folks are abed, and my burds are in bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drawn is the door, and dight with a pin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since I have in this house the athel belovèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall ware my time well, the while it may last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with skill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ye are welcome to my corse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Your pleasure to fulfil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Now must I by mere force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Your servant be, and will.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In good faith,” quoth Gawain, “gain I must hold it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I be nów no more the Knight that ye name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reach to the reverence ye read to me here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a wight unworthy, I wot well in my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by God I were glad, an you good thought it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by service or speech I might something do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your worship to please: ’twere a púre joy tó me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In good faith. Sir Gawain,” said the gay lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The prowess of price that pleases all others</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hold light or belittle, ’twere less than courteous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are ladies enow that had liefer today</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have you in their hold, as I have you here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear dalliance to deal with your dainty speeches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some solace to seek and assuage their cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than much of the gersom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a> and gold that they have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the High Lord I praise that the heaven upholds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have wholly in my hand what áll they desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by His grace.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">She made him ay great cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Lady so fair of face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The Knight with speech sincere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Answer’d her every case.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Madam,” said the merry man, “Mary reward you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have found, in good faith, your fraunchise is noble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others by hearsay hold their opinions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the honour they mete is more than my merit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis kindness in you, that of courtesy comes.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By our Lady,” she answer’d, “but I hold it other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For were I more worth than all women alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the wealth in the world I might wield at my will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chaffer and choose to achieve me a lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for nobleness, Sir Knight, that I have known in you here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your beauty and bounty, and your blithe demeanour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for all I e’er heard (and I hold it but true),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should no free<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> upon fold before you be chosen.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I wis,” said the wight, “ye have won you a better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am proud of the price that upon me ye set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am soothly your servant, my sovrain I deem you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your knight I’ll become: and may Christ you reward.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much did they moot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> of till midmorn was past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And áy the lády made líke as she lov’d him too well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he fared with defence, as faithful man should.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Though I were fairest of the fair,” in fear did she ponder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The less might his love be”⁠—for the loss that he bode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The dint that should him deave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That he might shun no way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lady spoke of leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And he granted her straightway.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So she gave him “Good-day,” and with a glance she laugh’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stonied him, as she stood, with stoor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> words enow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He that speeds each speech this dispórt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> repay you!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in mind I debate if ye bé Sir Gawain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why so?” the wight said, and in sadness he ask’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he fear’d he had fail’d in form of his speech:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the burd him bless’d and broke forth anon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So goodly a groom as Gawain is holden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counted for courteous o’er all other knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not lightly so long with a lady have stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without craving a kiss, for his courtesy’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By some trifling touch, as he talk’d to an end.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said Gawain “I grant you, since good it you seems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall kiss at your command, ’tis a Knight’s duty⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would I displease you; so plead it no more.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then comes she a-nigh, and catches him in arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bends courteously down and her knight kisses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comelily to Christ beken they each other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She departs by the door without more ado,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he bouns him from bed and busks him anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls to his chamberlain, chooses his raiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goes, when he’s graith, gaily to mass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he moved to his meat for a menseful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made merry all day till the moon was up,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">well fain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Fair welcome did he find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Between those ladies twain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Right gaily did they mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Their guest to entertain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And ay the lord of the land is laiking afield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hunting the hinds by holt and by heath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a sum had he slain, when the sun slanted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of does and other deer, to deem of were wonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they flock’d in full fain, the folk at the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quickly of the kill a quarry<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> they made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those of rank were ready, and right as they should</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gather’d the greatest of grease that were there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had them deftly undone, all duly by law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sóme by assay<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> searchèd them too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found two fingers of fat in the poorest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they slit up the slot, and, seizing the arber,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a sharp knife shore it, and sewed it again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next they sever’d the legs and stript off the hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke up the belly, and the bowels took out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gripp’d they the gargilon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a> and graithly departed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weasand from the wind-hole, and wound out the guts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shore off the shoulders with their shárp blàdes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And máde a líttle hole to líft them, to leave whole sides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rived they the breast and broke it in two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And again at the gargilon got them to work,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ripp’d the flesh readily, right to the fork,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voided out the avanters,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> and featly thereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The membranes lanced along by the ribs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last, they clove a clear way, close by the backbone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en to the haunch; it was all whole still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they heav’d it up whole, then hew’d off the loin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the offals that they name the numbles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a> I trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Along the fork o’ the thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The laps they lance behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To hew in two they hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">By the backbone to unbind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Both the head and the hawse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a> they hew’d off after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sunder’d full swiftly the sides from the chine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the corbies’ fee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> they cast in a bush;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thirl’d they the thick sides through by the rib,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slung them up high by slitting the sinews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’ry man for his fee, as falls him by custom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a fell of the fair beast fed they their hounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the liver and lights, the leather<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> of the paunches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bread bathed in blood, blent thereamongst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And boldly blew prize, while the bratches bay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the flesh they took up and fared towards home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding full stoutly many a strong moot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time daylight was done, they had drawn to the gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the comely castle, where the knight them bides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">so still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In bliss, with bright fire beat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lord is come theretil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">When Gawain did him meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">There was but weal at will.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then commanded the lord to muster his meiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his ladies both to bring with their burds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before all the folk, on the floor of the hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he sends forth the venison to fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in gamesome mood Sir Gawain he calls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tells him the tally of the táll dèer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shows him the sheen grease shorn from the ribs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How pleases you this play? Have I praise gotten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a thank sincere by my skill deservèd?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By my faith,” quoth he, “ ’tis the fairest hunting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen this seven year in season of winter.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis a gift for Gawain,” the goodman replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For by accord of covenant ye claim it your own.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That is sooth,” the Knight said, “and I say you the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I have worthily won these wonës within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wis, with as good will, I waive it to you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fair neck he folds in a fond embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kisses him as comely as he could it avise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here are my winnings, for I won no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all would I grant, if greater they had been.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fair gain!” said the goodman, “gramercy therefor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better worth though it were if ye would but discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where ye won this same wealth by force of your wits.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Twas not in the bargain, nor boots it to know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your dues ye have drawn, deem ye no other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Sir lord.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They laugh’d and made them blithe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">With many a courteous word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To supper they went forthwith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Fresh dainties on the board.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>After meat, by the chimney in chamber they sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And comfort them well with the winsome wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And again in their game they agreed on the morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fulfil the same foreward as before they had made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fortune should chance, their winnings to change⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aught new that they got, at night when they met.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This covenant they accorded before all the court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the beverage was brought, with bourd and with jest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a lovesome leave they took at the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all to their beds must busk them anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the cock had crow’n and cackled but thrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leapt up the lord, and his lieges each one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when mass and morsel they had meetly taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere dawn’d any day they dress’d to the forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to chase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Loudly with hunt and horns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Through plains they pass’d apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Uncoupled, among the thorns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The hounds so swift to race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soon they cried of a quest at a cárr<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> sìde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huntsman halloo’d the hounds that gave tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wroth words he utter’d, and wildly he call’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the hounds that heard him hasten’d at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And féll as fást on the tráil, forty together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then such a deafening din of those dogs in concert</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arose, that the rocks rung all about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hunters them hearten’d with horn and with mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all in a throng they thrust on together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between a flash<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> in that frith and a fearsome crag;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a knoll, by a cliff, at the carr side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the ruggèd rock in a rough knar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> tumbled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fared to the finding; the huntsmen them follow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a cast of that knar and the knot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a> beside it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they wist full well that the wild one was there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the bloodhounds bay’d the beast to announce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then they beat on the bushes, and bade him break cover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he sought, with disaster, the searchers athwart him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas a wonder of a swine that swung out upon them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long sunder’d from the sounder,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a> and sínce grown to age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fierce boar and fell, and fearsome for bigness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this grim one grunted, ’twas grievous to many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For three at a thrust he threw to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sped forth good speed, nor spited them more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all hollo’ed “Hi!” and “Hey! hey!” shouted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hórns to mouth hád, the hunt to recall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many were the merry mouths of men and of hounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That busk’d after boar, with boast and with clamour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full oft he bides the bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And maims the mute<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a> pell-mell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He hurts the hounds and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Piteously yowl and yell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So after the boar the bowmen hied them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aim’d at him arrows and hit him full oft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the points could not pierce the pith of his shields,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sharpest barb on his brawn would not bite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the shaven shaft shinder’d in pieces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The arrow-head, where it hit, ever rebounded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the dints at last of their dree strokes dazed him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frenzied with the fray he forth on them rush’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wounded them wickedly whéreso he sallied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many were adread, and drew them adree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the lord on a light horse launces<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref-136" epub:type="noteref">136</a> him after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bold man on bent his bugle he blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rides on a race through roan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref-137" epub:type="noteref">137</a> and thicket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuing this swine, till the sun breaks through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So this day they drive with doings afield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While our lovesome liege is lying abed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain graithly at home, in gear full rich</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Of sheen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lady not forgat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To greet him she came in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full early was him at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Seeking his will to win.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She comes to the curtain, at the Kníght she peeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Gawain her welcom’d with greeting full grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an amorous word the athel she answer’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat softly by his side, then suddenly laugh’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a loving look the liege she address’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir, if ye be Gawain, greatly I wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a prince so purely disposèd to good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is so uncouth to catch the manners of company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by terms if I teach you, ye tent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> it but ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have forgotten again what I yesterday taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the truest token of talk that I knew.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What is that?” said the wight, “I wot not your will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’tis sooth that ye say, myself am to blame.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis the lesson,” said the lady, “that of kissing ye learnt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where countenance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a> is clear, quickly to claim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So becomes ev’ry knight that courtesy uses.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now spare me,” quoth Gawain, “such speech any more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That durst I ne’er do, lest denayèd I were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, refus’d, I’m at fault though fairly I offer.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By my faith,” said the fair, “and who may refuse you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye are strong to constrain by strength, an you like,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any be so boorish the boon to deny.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So help me God,” quoth Gawain, “though good is your speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet force is a fool’s way, on fold where I dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any gift that is giv’n but with góod-wìll;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am at your command, to kiss if ye care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye may take when ye list, and leave when ye like,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">a space.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lady down did bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Courteously kiss’d his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Much speech did they expend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Of love, its grief and grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I would weet of you, wight,” that worthy replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If ye wrath not therewith, what were the reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so young and so gay as you at this time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So courteous, so knightly, as all know you abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should fail in the forms and fashion of court.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of áll the chóice of chívalry, the chief thing prais’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the leal game of love and errantry-lore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to tell of the trials of all trúe knìghts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the inscribèd title and text of their deeds:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lieges for love their lives have adventur’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Endured for their druery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a> doleful hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had vengeance by their valour and voided their sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought bliss into bower with bounties their own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ye are the noblest knight, known of your eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your name and your honour are aywhere upholden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I have sat by your side two several times</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no lightest word did light from your lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That belongèd to love, or lesser or greater;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So courteous as you, of so knightly professions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ought verily to yearn to a creature so young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And teach her some token of truelove dealings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! are ye so ignorant, in honour so high?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or deem ye me too dull your dalliance to hearken?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">For shame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Single I come and sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To learn of you some game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Please! warn me of your wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">While alone ye have your dame.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In good faith,” said Gawain, “may God you reward!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great is the glee, and the game to me huge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so worthy as you should win to my chamber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take pains with a poor man, and play with your knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With any kind of count’nance; it comforts me much.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to take up that task, and true love expound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Touching the text and the tales of romance)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you that, I wot well, wield more of skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that art, by the half, than a hundred of such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I am, or shall e’er be, on earth while I live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere a manifold folly, my fair, on my troth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But your bidding I’ll do to the best of my might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I am highly beholden, and ever I bind me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be soothly your servant, so save me the Almighty.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in talk did she try him and tempt him full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win him to woo her, whate’er she ween’d else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he defended so fair that no fault might appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor evil on either part, nor aught did they know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">but bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They laugh’d and had their play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">At last she did him kiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Made sign to wend her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And took her leave, I wis.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now bestirs him Sir Gawain and steps to his mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then dinner was dight, and daintily served.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He laik’d with the ladies the livelong day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the lord over laund launces full often</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursuing his swine, that swung by the banks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the best of his bratches the backs bit in sunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he bode at the bay, till the bowmen him shifted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And máde him máuger<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> his héad to move to the open;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many shafts flew, where the fólk him beset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet the stoutest at whiles to start did he make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till so daunted and fordone, he could dree it no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as hard as he might made off to a hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a bank, by a rock, with the burn beside it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, the bank at his back, to scrape he began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the froth at his chops foaming for fierceness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his white tusks whetted; they wounded him still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those bowmen so bold, about him that stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till awearied they were, yet they would not him near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">so wroth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For many his thrusts had borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Well seemèd all were loth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Be more with tusks betorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He was fierce and frenzied both.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Came that stalwart lord, his steed as he spurr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw him bide at the bay, with the bowmen about him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leapt him down lightly and, leaving his courser,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew a bright brand; then bigly he strode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hied fast through the ford where the fell beast waited;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, ware of the wight with the weapon in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hair bristled high, and so angerly snorted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many fear’d for that free lest the worse him befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then set forth the swine and made swift at his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the man and the boar were both upon heaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the wildest of the water; but woe’s master boar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For e’en as they meet, the man well marks him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right in his slot the sharp blade he sets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drives úp to the hilt; his heart is acloven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a snarl and a moan he moves o’er the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A hundred hounds him caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They bit him every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Hunters to bent him brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And dogs to kill set on.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was blowing of prize on many a proud horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hollo’ing from hunters that no hórns hàd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bratches all bay’d, as bade them their masters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were huntsmen in chief of that toilsome chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a wight who was wise in the woodcraft-lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This beast to unlace<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> right lustily gan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First he hews off his head and on high it sets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the backbone he breaks him in two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draws out the bowels, bakes them on glede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with bread therein blent his bratches rewards.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he cuts out the brawn in broad bright shields,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And has out the haslets,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> as e’en him beseems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the sides all whole he seizes together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on stang full strong stoutly he hangs them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So they have their swine, and swing away homeward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boar’s head was borne the bold man before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had finish’d him i’ the ford, by force of his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">beset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Until he saw Gawain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Long time it seemèd yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He call’d, and then came fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That knight his fees to get.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Sir Gawain he saw, full gay was the goodman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud was his speech, and his laughter merry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent for the ladies, assembled his meiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show’d them the shields, and shaped them the tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How large and how long that boar was of limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how fiercely he fought when he fled to the wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knight full comely commended the deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the prowess prais’d that the lord had proved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such a brawn of a beast, the blithe man said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or such sides of a swine had he seen ne’er before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they handled the huge head, full high was his praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet the horror that he had, he utter’d no less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Gawain,” said the goodman, “this game is your own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the covenant clear we accorded together.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That is sooth,” the knight said, “and as surely, i’ faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I give you again all my gets in return.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then clasp’d he his neck and courteously kiss’d him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And served him eftsoons with a second kiss after.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We are even,” quoth the athel, “this ev’ning once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all covenants we knit, since I cáme hìther,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by law.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“By Saint Giles,” the lord cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Ye are the best I know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ye’ll be rich in a trice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Such profits if ye draw.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then rais’d they on trestles the tables full tight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast on them cloths, and a clear light too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the walls they awak’d with the waxen torches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By servitours set, that served in the hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Múch noise of merriment made they anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On floor by the fire, and as free was the revel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At supper and after, with songs full glorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Christmas-conduit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a> and carols of dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the mannerly mirth that man may tell of;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our lovesome liege at the lady’s side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sweetly she behav’d, with so seemly a semblance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stol’n looks of love, that stalwart to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the wight was forwonder’d, and wroth with himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for his nurture so fine he would not refuse her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But courtesy show’d, how the case soe’er turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">awry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They have their play in hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In pleasure still they vie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then to chamber is the call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And to chimney-side they hie.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There drank they and toasted, and talk’d yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of renewing that note on New-Year’s eve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Gawain craved leave to go on the morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’twas nigh to the term, when time was to travel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the lord dissuaded, and besought him to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said “As I’m true man (my troth will I plight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt be at thy bourn thy business to settle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the New-Year’s light, long before prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou mayst lie in thy loft and lodge at thine ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I hunt in this holt, and we’ll hold to our terms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our chaffer exchange, when from chase I return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have tried thee twice, and true have I found thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ‘third time throw best’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a> bethink thee tomorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Máke we mérry while we máy, with a mind upon joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For woe may we win whénso we like.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus graithly ’twas granted, and Gawain is stay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drink blithely was brought, and to bed they hied them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Sir Gawain lies and sleeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full still and soft all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The lord his hunting keeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full early is he dight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>After mass a morsel he took with his men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merry was the morning, his mount he bade bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the athels all, that the hunt should follow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the riding were ready, array’d at the gates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair gleams it afield, for the frost clings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fiery red on the wrack rises the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And edges with crimson the clouds of the welkin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hunters cast off by a hólt sìde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rocks in the forest rung with their horns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hounds fell on the scent where the fox them bode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cross’d and recross’d, by craft of their wiles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kennet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a> gave cry and the huntsman call’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hounds came panting, all in a pack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran forth in a rabble, right on the trail⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he frisk’d off before them; they found him anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when they had sighted, pursued him full speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bewrayèd poor Reynard with a wroth clamour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then dodg’d he and doubled through dingle and spinney,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Héld back, and hearken’d by hedges full oft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last by a little ditch he leapt o’er a quickset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stole out full stilly, astray by a copse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ween’d to have outwitted the hounds by his wiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was went, ere he wist, to óne of the stations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where three men athwart him threaten’d him at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">the gray!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Again he swervèd forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And started quick astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And with all the woe on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To the wood he went away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then was it very heaven to hearken the hounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the mute all met him, mingled together:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a sorrow at sight of him they set on his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if clustering cliffs had clatter’d on heaps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here he was hollo’ed when hunters him met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or grimly was greeted with growling speech:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he was threaten’d and “thief” call’d often,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ay the teasers at his tail, that tarry he might not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft he was harried when he hied for the open,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft he reel’d in again, Reynard so wily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hunters ay sped them, splash’d and bespatter’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this manner by the mounts, till midmorn was past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the athel at home lay wholesomely sleeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within comely curtains, on that cóld mòrning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the lady for Love let him not sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never ’paired<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> the purpose or pine in her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in haste she was up and hied to his chamber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a merry mantle, meet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was furr’d full fine with fells well-trimm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no hues on her head but the athel stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twined on her tressure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a> by twenties in clusters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thriv’n face so fair and her throat were unveil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her breast and her back the bodice show’d bare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She comes within door, and closes it after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waives up a window, and on the wíght càlls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleasantly rallies him with a ready word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">and cheer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Ah! Sir, how mayst thou sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">On such a morning clear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He was in dreamland deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But then he did her hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In a dree gloom of dream that dear man was mumbling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a haunting thought weigh’d heavy on his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How destiny that day should deal him his weird<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When at the green chapel he must greet his man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his buffet abide, nor debate any more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when that comely came, he recover’d his wits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dropt out of dreamland, and dress’d him to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady so lovesome came laughing full sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell o’er his fair face and featly him kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he welcom’d her worthily, with winsome cheer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw her so glorious and gaily attired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So faultless of feature, so fine of her hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a wellspring of joy warmèd his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with smiles and with mirth, they mooted of play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their gossip together was gladness and bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">full kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They spoke no words but good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Much joy there did they find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Great peril between them stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But Mary her knight did mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For that princess of price so hotly him press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the limit of love, that at last him behoved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or consent to her suit or sullen refuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cared for his courtesy, lest caitiff he prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his dámnation more, to be doomèd in sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be traitor untrue to the lord that him trusted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“God shield,” quoth the wight, “that sháll not befall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a lover’s laugh he put lightly aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the speeches so fond that fell from her lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sadly she said, “Ye are surely to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye love not her life that ye lie here beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woman in the world most wounded in heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless ye have a leman that ye love very dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have plighted your troth with a pledge so true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye list never loose it; I believe it as now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I pray, on your troth, that truly ye tell me⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all saints that there are conceal not the sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">for guile.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The knight said “By Saint John,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And gently did he smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“In faith I have right none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And none will have this while.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Tis a word,” said that wight, “that worst is of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soothly I’m answer’d, and sorely it wounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kiss me now comely, to care ere I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may but mourn among men, as maid that much loves.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stoop’d with a sigh and seemlily kiss’d him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sever’d from his side, and said as she stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, dear, at departing, do me this solace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat give me as a gift, thy glove it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I máy thee remember, my mourning to lessen.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, I wis,” said the wight, “I would I had here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The liefest thing for thy love that in land I possess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have deservèd in sooth, and seemlily oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More reward by right than e’er I may reach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to give you for love⁠—it little avail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It becomes not your worth to win at this time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glove for a guerdon, at Gawain’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am here on an errand in an únknown land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carry no coffers, with presents of cost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It mislikes me, lady, I love you too dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We must do as chance deals, so deem not amiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">nor pine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Nay, Knight of high honoùrs,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then said that lady fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Though I have nought of yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet shall ye have of mine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She raught<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a> him a ring of rich red gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a blazing stone that stóod high in bezel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blink’d as bright as the beams of the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weet ye well, it was worth wealth unmeasured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the knight refused it and said to that fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I wish no gifts for good, my gay, at this time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have none to offer, and nought will I take.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then pray’d she the prince and press’d him again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he swore by his sooth, and still her denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was sorry he forsook and said at the last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If the ring ye refuse, for its semblance too rich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye would not so highly be holden to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall give you my girdle; your gain is the less.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took lightly a lace that loop’d round her body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knit on her kirtle, under mantle so clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A green silk girdle with pendants of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair gauds and golden gear’d at the edges.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then gaily again the girdle she offer’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trifle unworthy, woúld he but take it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he would not (quoth he) anywise in the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either gold or gersom, ere God him vouchsafe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chance to achieve that he had thére chòsen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And therefore, I pray, may it not displease you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let bé your business, to your boon shall I never</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">agree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full well my debt I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For your blithe courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And whatever wind may blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Your servant shall I be.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Why leave ye this lace?” the lady replied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For its simple semblance? Such it well seems;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look! ’tis but little, and less is its worth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the virtues who knew that are knitted herein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d appraise it perchance at a price very high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the man that is girt with this girdle of green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as ’tis firmly fasten’d upon him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s no athel under Heaven can hew him to ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may not be slain, for sleight upon earth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then cast he with care, and it came to his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twere a jewel for the jeopardy that was him adjudg’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he fared to the chapel his fortune to fetch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might he shun to be slain, ’twere a shift full glorious!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he suffer’d her so, nor her suit hinder’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she proffer’d her prize and press’d it again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he granted, she gave it with a goód wìll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And besought him for her sake to discover it never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But leally it hide; and the liege answer’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Never wight shall it weet, I wis, on this earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">but we.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He thank’d her oft again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">A grateful man was he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">She kiss’d her knight, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">She had giv’n him kisses three.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then took she her leave and left him therewith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For more mirth of that man míght she not get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the good Sir Gawain graith’d him anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose and array’d him in a raiment noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid by the lovelace, that the lady had raught him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hid it with heed where eft he might find it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So then to the chapel chose he the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approachèd a priest and privily pray’d him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lift up his life, and learn him how better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul he should save when hence he should seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he shrove him clean and show’d his misdeeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both the less and the more, and mercy besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And absolution he ask’d of the priest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who assoil’d him surely, and as sinless him made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if day of doom should have dawn’d on the morrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he made him as merry among those dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With comely carols and all kinds of delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he ne’er did ere that day, till the dark night came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Each man had courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Of him, and said “I wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He ne’er was so merrie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Since hither he came, ere this.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let him lie in that lee,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a> (and love him betide!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the lord is on laund, leading the chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fox he has kill’d that so far he follow’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he sprang o’er a spinney the shrew to espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he heard the hounds that hustled him on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reynard came running through a ruggèd clough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the rabble in a race right at his heels;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wight was ware of him, and warily bode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew a bright brand, and drove at the beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who swerv’d from the sword and away would have swung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a hound was át him or ever he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And before the foal’s feet the pack on him fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worried me that wily with a wróth clàmour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then alighted the lord, and leaping to seize him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rescued poor Reynard from ravening jaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And held him o’erhead, hollo’ing loudly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the barking pack full bravely him bay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The huntsmen hied them with horns a many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding recall till they sighted the quarry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as were come that company noble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that bugle e’er bore, blew them together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the others hollo’ed that no hórns hàd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas the merriest music that man ever heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rich dirge that was rais’d for Reynard his soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">All’s done!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Hunters their hounds reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Fawning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a> their heads, each one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And then they take Reynàrd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And strip his coat anon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then hied they homeward, for even was come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding bigly on their bugle horns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lord at last is alighted at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finds fire upon floor, and the fair knight beside it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Gawain the good, who glad was withal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had delight of his love those ladies among;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wore a blue mantle was meet to the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a surcoat full seemly with soft fur lined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his hood of the same hung on his shoulder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Border’d were both with ermine about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He meets me his man amidst of the floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All gamesome he greets him and graciously speaks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I am first to fulfil our forewards today,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we spoke, good speed, when we spared not of drink.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then accolls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a> he that knight and kisses him thrice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soundly and with semblance as sober as he might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By heaven!” said the other, “ye had happy reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winning of your gains, if ye gave but as good.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, the price!” quoth the prince, “what profits to ask?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have paid you complete the purchase I owed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Marry,” said the merry man, “mine is a poorer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For áll day I hunted and Í have nought gotten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this fox-skin foul, the fiend have the goods!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is far too poor to pay for the purchase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye press on me here, the precious three kisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">so good.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Enough,” quoth Sir Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“I thank you, by the rood:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And how the fox was slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He told him, as they stood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With mirth and with minstrelsy, with meats at their will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They made as merry as any men might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save they were doting mad or drunk had been else;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What with laughing of ladies and lightsome jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain and the goodman, full glad were they both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the meiny also many japes made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till was come the season when sever they must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to busk them to bed behoved them at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lowly his leave of the lord took Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goodly him greeted and graciously thank’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For the happy sojourn I have had in this hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the honour of the high feast, the High King reward you!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I make me your man, to your mind if it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For needs múst, as ye know, I move on the morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the promis’d squire ye shall send to escort me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Green Chapel, as God will me suffer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dree on that day the doom of my weird.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“In God’s name,” said the goodman, “with a góod wìll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I áll perform, that ever I offer’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then assigns he a servant to set him i’ the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And conduct him by the downs (lest dole him befall),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the forest track, where through frith he should fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain to thank was fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For the kindness he would do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then of those ladies twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He took his leave also.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With kissings full sad he said his farewells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a húndred heártfelt thánks he had for them too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those lovesome ladies the like return’d him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with careful sighings beken’d him to Christ.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes courteous leave of that kindly meiny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each man that he met, he made him a thank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his seemly solace, and the boon service</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had been busy about him at his bidding to do:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each servitour there was as sorry to sever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they had wonèd for ay with the worshipful Gawain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then those lieges with light him led to his chamber</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought to his bed, to be at his rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he slept there soundly, say it I dare not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he had much on the morrow to mind, if he would,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">in thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Let him lie there at will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He is near the goal he sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">If ye’ll a while be still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">I shall tell you how he wrought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
