<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Fit IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="fit-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Fit</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now the New-Year nighs, and the night passes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dáy treads on dark, as deems the Almighty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But weathers full wild in the world awaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds strike keenly the cold to the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With enough of the North the nakèd to teen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The snow shower’d snell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> and snapèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> the wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whistling wind from the welkin smote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drove each dale full of drifts very deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft listen’d the leal man that lay in his bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he lock’d his lids, but little he slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by each cock that crew he knew well his hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full early was he up, ere ány day dawn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there was light from a lamp that leam’d in his chamber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He call’d to his chamberlain (and the call he answer’d),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade bring his byrnie and saddle his bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his man is afoot and fetches his weeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And graithes me Sir Gawain in a great fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First he clad him in clothes the cold for to temper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke in his harness that he had housèd with care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both his pounce<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> and his plates, polisht full clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rings of his rich mail, scour’d of all rust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All was fresh as at first, and fain was he then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to speed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He had on him each piece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Well wiped, from foulness free’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gayest from here to Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain bade bring his steed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Gawain arrays him in raiment full rich⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His coat, with the cognisance of clear devices</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work’d upon velvet, virtuous stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set about by the border, embroider’d seams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lined full fairly with furs of the finest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he left not the lace, the lady’s guerdon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Gawain forgat not for good of his soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had belted his brand on his broad haunches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then dress’d he his druery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> double about him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wound round his waist that winsome lace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The girdle of green that gaily beseem’d him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the royal red so rich in semblance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not for its wealth did the wight wear it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the pride of the pendants, though polisht they were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though the glittering gold gleam’d at the ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to save his dear soul, when to suffer behoved⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bide bale without brand or blade to defend him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Bold man! his hour is due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He passes from the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Praises that meiny true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And often thanks withal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then was Gringolet graith, a great horse and noble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had been lodg’d to his liking, and lustily fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him list prick for point,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> that proud horse then.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain to him goes, and gazes on his coat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And says to himself (and swears by his sooth)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“There is a meiny in this moat, that of courtesy minds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man that maintains them, máy he have joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady, long live she, and love her betide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever for charity they cherish a guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And offer him hostel, the hígh God reward them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That upholds the heaven, and also you all!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if life I may lead so long upon earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some guerdon I shall give you, right gladly anon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he steps into stirrup, and strides aloft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They show him his shield, and on shoulder he girds it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets goad to Gringolet with his gilded heels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who starts on the stones, and stands there no longer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to prance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The squire on horse was then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That bore his spear and lance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The castle he did beken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To Christ, and wish’d “Good Chance.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The bridge was drawn down, and the bróad gàtes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On both hands unbarr’d, and borne wide open;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he blessèd himself and the board rode over.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He prais’d the porter, (who kneel’d to the prince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving him “Good-day,” and “God save Gawain”)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then went on his way with the wight alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That should guide him i’ the gate to the gloomy place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where behoved him endure the doleful onset.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rode by banks where boughs were bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clomb by cliffs where the cóld clùng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High were the clouds, but ’twas ugly thereunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It mizzled on the moor, on the mountains it pour’d⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each hill had a hat and a hood of vapour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brooks boil’d and broke as their banks they swept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shatter’d on shores where adown they shot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! wildsome was the way where by wood they should ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till ’twas soon the season when the sun rises</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">that tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">They were on a hill full high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The white snow lay beside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The squire that rode him by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then bade the knight abide:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For I have been your squire and escorted you hither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye’re now not far from the noted place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye have spirr’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> and spied so specially after;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall say you for sooth, seeing that I know you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye are a lord in land that I love full well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would ye work by my wit, your way were the better.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The place that ye press to, full perilous is holden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wones a wight in that waste, the worst upon earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he strong is and stern, and to strike he loves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he is mightier than men on middle-earth living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bigger in body than the bést fòur</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That are in Arthur’s house, Hector or other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this chance he achieves at the Green Chapel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None passes that place so proud in his arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he dings him to death by dint of his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a man without measure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> no mercy he uses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be it churl or chaplain by the chapel that rides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monk or mass-priest or any man else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’d as lief him kill as alive be himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I say you as surely as in saddle ye sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hither come and ye’re kill’d,” if the knight have his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trust ye my troth, though lives ye had twenty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to spend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He has wonèd here full yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Made sorrow without end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Against his onset sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Ye may not you defend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Therefore, good Sir Gawain, give him good-bye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And go you some other gate, in God’s name I pray you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose some other country, where Christ may you speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall hie home; and eke will I promise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall swear by God and his good Hallows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So help me the halidom) and oaths a many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I’ll keep your secret and slip not a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye e’er flinchèd or fled for foe that I wist.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gramercy,” he said, and he searchèd his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Well worth thee, good wight, that wishest me well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am in sooth full sure my secret thou’lt guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wert thou never so true, if this tryst I kept not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But flinchèd for fear, in the form that thou sayst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I were a craven coward beyond all excuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any check that may chance, to the chapel I’ll go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And talk with that tyrant the tale that me list,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come weal or come woe, as my weird shall ordain me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">to have.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Though cruellest knave alive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He be, and stand with stave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Full well can God contrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">His servants for to save.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Marry,” said his man, “if so minded thou be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on thy ówn dear head such harm thou wilt set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to lose thine own life, I let not nor stay thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have thy helm on thy head, and thy spear in thy hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ride me down this rake<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> by the rock-side yonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it bring thee to the bottom of the bare valley;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then loók a líttle on the láund on thy left hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt see in that slade the chapel thou seekest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the burly man on bent that bides in the place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now good-bye, in God’s name, Gawain the noble!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for all gold above ground would I go with thee still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be thy fellow through the frith, but a foot further.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then his bridle he tugg’d, and homeward he turn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set heels to his horse as hard as he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leapt o’er the laund and left the Knight standing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“By God’s self,” quoth Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“I’ll neither greet nor groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To God’s will am I fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">My own will to atone.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then goads he Gringolet and gets to the track,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shapes him by a shore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> at the edge of a shaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rides down the hillside right to the valley;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He look’d o’er the waste and full wild he ween’d it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sign of a shelter saw he aywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bare hills and brent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> upon bóth hànds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough-knuckled knars with gnarlèd stones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clustering cliffs that grazèd the clouds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full often he hoved, and halted his horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft his way changed that chapel to seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on no síde could it see, and strange he thought it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon, a little on a laund, a low as it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A barrow by a bank at the búrn sìde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by a fall of that foaming water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein bubbled the burn, as if it had boil’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He urges his horse and hies to the knoll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lightly by a linden leaps down and ties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rein of his rouncy to a ruggèd branch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he bouns to the barrow and about it he strides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Busily debating what thing it might be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It had a hole at the end and at either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was graithly o’ergrown with grass all in patches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all hollow within⁠—only an old cavern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a crevice of a crag; he could not it read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">or spell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Ah, Lord!” said the good knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“Is this the Green Chapel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Here might about mid-night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The dule<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> his matins tell.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, I wis,” said the wight, “ ’tis wildsome here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An evil orat’ry, with herbs grown over!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well beseems it that sire in his suit of green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here to deal his devotions in the devil’s wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel ’tis the fiend, in my five wits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That has stablisht this tryst, to destroy me herein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a chapel unchancy, (ill-cheer it betide!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cursedest kirk I cáme ever into!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With high helm on his head and lance in his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He roams up anon to that rough rocky dwelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he hears, up the hill, in a hígh cràg</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a bank o’er the brook, a boisteous noise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How it clatter’d in the cliff as though it should cleave it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one on a grindlestone grinding a scythe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How it hiss’d and whirr’d like water at a mill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How it rush’d and rung! ’twas ruth to hear it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By God,” said the gallant, “this gear, as I trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a greeting is meant for the good Sir Gawain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">by way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">If God so work, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">It daunts me not nor may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Though out of life I pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">No noise shall me affray.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then he lift up his voice and loudly he called:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who is master in this mound, to meet me at the tryst?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now the good Gawain is going right here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any wight ought will, let him win hither quick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(’Tis either now or never) that his needs he may speed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Abide!” cried one, on the bank high above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou shalt have full promptly all that I promised.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet came he not down, but kept up his clatter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went on a-whetting, for a while longer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then clamb’ring by a crag, where a crevice there was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wight out-whirl’d him, with weapon in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Dane’s axe new-dight, to deal him the dint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It had a blade right keen that curv’d by the haft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well sharpen’d and filed, full four foot in breadth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas no less, by the lace that leam’d on the handle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the grim man in green was gear’d as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both his leer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> and his legs, his locks and his beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that firmly on foot he fared on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the stale to the stone, as ye stalk with a crutch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he won to the water, he waded it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hopp’d o’er on his axe with an agile stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A burly man on bent, and on that broad carpet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">of snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain the Knight did greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet louted nothing low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The other said, “Now, Sir sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Man true to tryst I know.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Gawain,” said the green one, “may God thee guard!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art welcome, I wis, good wight, to my place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hast timed thy travel as true man should.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knowest the covenants we accorded together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this time twelvemonth thou tookest thy dues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now at this New-Year thou needs must requite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Today in this dale we shall deal by ourselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is none to say nay, knock as we like.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhasp now thy helmet, and have here thy pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And resist me no more than thyself I resisted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou severedst my head at a single stroke.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth Gawain, “by God, that gave to me life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall grudge thee not a grain any grame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> that befalls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mind thee! one stroke! and quite still shall I stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor resist any wise, work how thou wilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">unfair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He bent his neck and bow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And show’d the nape ail bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He look’d like man uncow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For death he had no care.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then the man in the green graith’d him anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gather’d his grim tool, Gawain to smite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the bir<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> of his body he bore it aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feinted as fierce as though he would fell him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he driv’n it adown as dree as he ettled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There had been dead of that dint the doughty Gawain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he glent on the gisarm with a sideling glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As down it came gliding, on ground to destroy him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shránk a líttle his shóulders at the sharp iron.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other swerv’d in his swing and the swift blade withheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with proud words many that prince he reproved:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou art not Gawain,” quoth he, “that so good is holden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ne’er host overawed by hill or by valley.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou that flinchest for fear ere thou feel any hurt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that knight such cowardice cóuld I ne’er hear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither flinch’d I nor fled, when the fell tool thou swungest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor argument held, in the house of King Arthur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My head flew to my foot, yet flee did I never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou quailest at heart, ere any harm happen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better man on bent behoves me be call’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">therefore.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Quoth Gawain, “I flinchèd once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But so will I no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet if my head hit the stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">I can it not restore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But busk thee. Sir Bold, and bring me to the point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deal me my destiny and do it out of hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I shall stand thee a stroke, nor start any more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thine axe have me hit: my honour I pledge thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Have at thee!” said the other, and heaving his tool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d as wild and as wroth as if wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> he had been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce aim did he ettle, but or ever he touch’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand he withheld that no hurt might befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gawain boldly him bides, nor budges a whit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stands still as a stone, or a stock either</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is grappled in rock with roots a hundred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then merrily spoke he, the man in the green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now thou art heart-whole, to hit thee behoves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold back the hood that from Arthur thou hadst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look to thy neck at the knock that is coming.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rudely Sir Gawain, raging with wrath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why! thrash on, thou thro<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> man, thou threat’nest too long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hope that thy heart at thine ówn self may quail.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I’ faith,” said the fell man, “so fiercely thou speakest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll no longer delay, nor let thee thine errand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">e’en now!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then takes he stance to strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And puckers lip and brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">No wonder if him mislike</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That hopes for no rescue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He lifts his axe lightly and lets it adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the bit of the blade on the báre nàpe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It hurt him no more, though he hammer’d full hard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to nick him a cut on the neck, at the side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the sharp blade shore through the skin to the flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sheen blood shot o’er his shoulder to ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the blood when he saw so bright on the snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sprang forth like mad, a spear-length and more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And angerly his helm on his head did he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot round his shield the shoulder beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his bright sword drew: then broke he forth boldly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Not since he was man born of a mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he e’er in this world been a wight so blithe):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Stop, Sirrah, thy strokes! I stand thee no more!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a stroke in this stead without strife have I ta’en,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more if thou deal I shall dearly requite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And treat thee as traitor (trust ye my word)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">and foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But one stroke to me falls⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The compact said right so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Shapen in Arthur’s halls⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To a second, I say No.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That other stood off, on his axe he rested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shaft to the ground on the sharp head he lean’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He look’d at the leal man that strode on the laund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw that doughty on bent so boldly abide him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Armed, and unawed: in his heart he liked it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in merrier mood, he mended his note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a gallant word to Sir Gawain he spoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir Bold, on this bent bé not so wrathful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man unmannerly here has misused thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the covenant broke at the King’s court shapen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cut did I promise, so count thee well paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I deem thee full-quit of all debt that is due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I dealt more nimbly, a deadlier dint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I serv’d thee perchance and mischiev’d thee for ever.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the first of those strokes was a friendly feint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor meant I to mar thee; so much was thy right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the covenant accorded that night at our court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When troth thou didst keep and wert true to thy trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gav’st me thy gains, as good man behoved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the next was a menace for the morrow morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou kissedst my consort, and the kisses didst yield.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice faithful I found thee, and feints did I make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">instead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">True man must pay his due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then need he nothing dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Third time thou were not true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And the harm is on thy head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For ’tis my weed that thou wearest, that woven girdle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from my wife didst thou win it, that wot I full well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know of thy kisses, and your courtly disport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the wooing of my wife: I wrought it myself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sent her to essay thee, and I think thee in sooth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most faultless knight, that on foot ever fared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a pearl by the pea all price is above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So by gay knights all, in good faith, is Gawain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with the lace in lealty a little ye fail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet it wás not for wooing, nor wantonness either,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for love of your life: the less do I blame you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great while that stalwart stood in a study,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So grievèd for grame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> that he groan’d in his heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the blood from his breast blent in his visage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shrank so for shame at the speech he had heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first word in the world that the wight uttered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was “Cursèd be cowardice and covetise both!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In yóu is víllany and více, that virtue destroy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then caught he the lace, and the knot he loosen’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fiercely it flung to the green man on field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Look ye! the false weed! and foul it befall!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cared for thy knock, and cowardice taught me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To accord me with covetise, and be false to my kind⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The largess and leaky that ’longs to a knight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though faulty and false, afear’d was I still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of treachery and untrúth; betide them may sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">and care!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Here, I confess my sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">All faulty is my fare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Let me your will but win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And eft I shall be ware.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then laugh’d the gay lord and lightly he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I shall hold it all heal’d, the harm that I had;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art confessèd so clean, and clear’d of misdeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the penance hast paid at the point of mine axe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I hold thee as surely assoil’d of thy sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if thou never hadst faulted since first thou wert born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I give thee, for guerdon, the gold-hemm’d girdle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is green as my gown, and by it, Sir Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou may’st mind on this mellay each morn that thou ridest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With princes of price: ’tis thy precious token</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this chance at the chapel, ’mongst chivalrous knights.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now ye shall come this New-Year to my castle again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we’ll revel the remnant of this feast so rich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">with joy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Then press’d him that gay lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">“With my fair wife, think I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">We shall you well accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">That was your enemy.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, for sooth,” the Knight said (and seizing his helmet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He doff’d it for courtesy, and kindly him thank’d)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O’erlong have I wonèd: may weal you betide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the Athel on High that all honour ordains!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greet me with courtesy your comely consort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both the one and the other my honour’d ladies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bewiled with their wit the unwary Gawain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis in faith no marvel if a fool go mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by wiles of women to sorrow be won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of old was Adam by óne beguiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Solomon by sundry; and Samson eftsoons⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dalilah dealt him his weird, and David thereafter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was blinded by Báthsheba, and had bale very much.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All wasted by women! ’Twere a win unmeasured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love and believe not, if leal man but could:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thése were of náme the nóblest, and knew prosperity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above all others, that were ever on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">bemused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Yet they were all bewiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">By women that they used:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">If I be now beguiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Shall I not be excused?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But your girdle!” said Gawain, “may God you reward!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall wear it with a will, not for winsome gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the ceinture of silk, or the swinging pendants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor for wealth or for worship, or the wondrous embroid’ries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a symbol of my sinning I shall see in it oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I ride in renown, and rue to myself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the fault and the frailty of sinful flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How tender to take any touch of defilement!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if pride e’er prick me for prowess of arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heed to this lace will humble my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing I pray you, an’t please you, Sir Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since ye’re lord of this land, where I lodged at mine ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In your wone, with worship⁠—and reward you may He</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That upholds the heavens and on hígh sìts!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By what name are ye known? and I shall nó more ask.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I will say you the sooth,” then said the Green Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Bercilac of Hígh-Desert I hight in my home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was Morgan la Fay, in my meiny that lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the might of her magic that moved me to seek you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mysteries of Merlin full many has she learnt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For once on a day she had dealing in druery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that wizardly clerk, and she knows all your knights:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">Dread dame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Morgan, the goddess high⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Therefore it is her name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">No knight so proud goes by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">But she his pride can tame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“She sent me by craft to the court of your King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make trial of its pride, whether truth it might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the renown that runs of the Round Table;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that witchcraft she wrought, your wits to dumbfound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to daunt Queen Guenore, and do her to death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that ghoulish game, and the ghostly speaker</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his head in his hand at the high table.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis she that is here, the ancient at home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is even thine aunt, Arthur’s half-sister,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Duchess’s daughter that dwelt at Tintagel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to Uther bore King Arthur the athel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I beg thee, Sir Knight, come back to thine aunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make merry in my moat; my meiny much loves thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I wish thee as well, good wight, by my faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any gallant under God, for thy great lealty.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he nick’d him with nay, and could nót be persuaded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then accoll’d they and kiss’d and bekenn’d each other</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Prince of paradise, and parted right there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">on snow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Gawain on steed, full keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To Arthur’s house did go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">And the knight in the bright green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">To his own hold also.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wild ways in the world now wanders Sir Gawain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the gift of his life he had gotten again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft he harbour’d in house, and out-of-doors often,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had adventures in vale and victories many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I intend not today to tell you in story.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was heal’d of the hurt that he had on his neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the gleaming belt he bore thereabout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a baldric, slantwise, bound by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loop’d in a knot, his left arm beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a symbol of the sin that he was seiz’d in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus came the good Knight, all sound, to the Court;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was weal in that wone when wist it the King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wist that Gawain was come; goód news he thought it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First kiss’d him of all the King and the Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then many a sickar knight sought to salute him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his wayfare would weet: all the wonders he told them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The haps and the hardships he had on his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chance of the chapel, the cheer of the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love of the lady, and the lace at the last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cut ’neath his collar discover’d he then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the lord of the land for unlealty him gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">for blame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">In anguish did he speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">He groan’d for grief and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The blood blent in his cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">For the blot upon his name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Look! my lord!” said the liege, and the lovelace he handled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This is the band of blame that I bear round my neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the dole and the damage that there was dealt me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the cowardice and covetise wherein I was caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the token of the untruth that I was ta’en in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must needs it wear the while that I live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man may hide his harm but úndo he cannot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the knot is once knit, it may never be loos’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King him comforts; and all of the court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With laughter agreed, for love of the liege,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lords and ladies that ’long’d to the Table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one of the brotherhood, a baldric should bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A band worn slantwise of a bríght grèen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After Gawain’s suit, for the sake of Gawain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas a glorious token of the’ Table Round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hé that hád it was hónour’d for evermore after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ’tis breved in the best of the books of romance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in Arthur’s time this adventure betid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Books of Britain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a> bear of it witness.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Brutus, the bold knight, boun’d hither first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the siege and the assault were ceasèd at Troy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i13">I wis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Many marvels here-before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Have fallen such as this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">The crown of thorns Who bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">Now bring us to His bliss. <strong>Amen.</strong></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i8">
						<strong xml:lang="la">Hony soyt qui mal pence.</strong>
					</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
